README.md, before:

# ⚡ EV Charging Management System

This is a backend system for managing Electric Vehicle (EV) charging sessions for companies.  
It allows companies to manage their vehicles and drivers, track charging sessions, and generate consumption reports.

Built with **Laravel**, **PostgreSQL**, and **Docker**, the project provides a production-like environment for scalable backend development.

---

## 🚀 Tech Stack

- PHP 8.x
- Laravel 11
- PostgreSQL
- Docker + Docker Compose
- Pest (testing)
- PHPStan (static analysis)
- Laravel Pint (code style)
- Xdebug (optional for debugging)

---

## ⚙️ Development Setup

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/andrepgsilva/ev-charging-backend.git
cd ev-charging-backend
```

### General Configuration
#### Copy the .env.example and Create Your Own .env
``` bash
cp .env.example .env
```
Get the database env variables on docker-compose.yaml and use to configure your env.

#### Start Containers
```bash docker-compose up -d --build ```
#### Install PHP Dependencies Inside the Container
``` bash
docker exec -it app composer install
```
#### Generate Application Key
``` bash
docker exec -it app php artisan key:generate
```

#### Run database migrations
``` bash
docker exec -it app php artisan migrate
```

### WSL Config
The project already has a VS Code configuration to run with Xdebug. If you are using Docker with Windows + WSL you will probably need to do a post forward, so Xdebug can work correctly.

**Run Powershell as administrator:** 
``` Bash
netsh interface portproxy set v4tov4 listenport=9000 listenaddress=0.0.0.0 connectport=9000 connectaddress=YOUR_HOST_ADDRESS
```
Your host address can be found using the command below:
``` Bash
wsl hostname -I
```
#### PostgreSQL
The host address will be the DB_HOST for Postgres. It need to be added on your .env.
Other configuration like, port, database name and password can be found - or changed - on docker-compose.yaml.

### 🧪 Code Quality & Testing
#### Run tests
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:unit
```
#### Static Analysis
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:types
```
#### Fix Code Style
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:lint
```

#### You Can Use All Commands at Once
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test
```

### 🧑‍💻 Author
Made with ❤️ by [Your Name]

Commit message:

feat: update database configuration for testing and add monthly partitioning for charging sessions

README.md, after:

# ⚡ EV Charging Management System

This is a backend system for managing Electric Vehicle (EV) charging sessions for companies.  
It allows companies to manage their vehicles and drivers, track charging sessions, and generate consumption reports.

Built with **Laravel**, **PostgreSQL**, and **Docker**, the project provides a production-like environment for scalable backend development.

---

## 🚀 Tech Stack

- PHP 8.x
- Laravel 11
- PostgreSQL
- Docker + Docker Compose
- Pest (testing)
- PHPStan (static analysis)
- Laravel Pint (code style)
- Xdebug (optional for debugging)

---

## ⚙️ Development Setup

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/andrepgsilva/ev-charging-backend.git
cd ev-charging-backend
```

### General Configuration
#### Copy the .env.example and Create Your Own .env
``` bash
cp .env.example .env
```
Get the database env variables on docker-compose.yaml and use to configure your env.

#### Start Containers
```bash docker-compose up -d --build ```
#### Install PHP Dependencies Inside the Container
``` bash
docker exec -it app composer install
```
#### Generate Application Key
``` bash
docker exec -it app php artisan key:generate
```

#### Run database migrations
``` bash
docker exec -it app php artisan migrate
```

### WSL Config
The project already has a VS Code configuration to run with Xdebug. If you are using Docker with Windows + WSL you will probably need to do a post forward, so Xdebug can work correctly.

**Run Powershell as administrator:** 
``` Bash
netsh interface portproxy set v4tov4 listenport=9000 listenaddress=0.0.0.0 connectport=9000 connectaddress=YOUR_HOST_ADDRESS
```
Your host address can be found using the command below:
``` Bash
wsl hostname -I
```
#### PostgreSQL
The host address will be the DB_HOST for Postgres. It need to be added on your .env.
Other configuration like, port, database name and password can be found - or changed - on docker-compose.yaml.

### 🧪 Code Quality & Testing
#### Run tests
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:unit
```
#### Static Analysis
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:types
```
#### Fix Code Style
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test:lint
```

#### You Can Use All Commands at Once
``` bash
docker-compose exec app composer test
```

## Strategies
### Charging Sessions Table Partitioning
**Why Partition?**

The charging_sessions table is expected to grow rapidly, with millions of records per year as the platform scales. To ensure high performance for queries and maintenance, we use PostgreSQL native table partitioning by month.

**Benefits**:

- Performance: Queries for recent sessions (e.g., “last month’s usage”) only scan relevant partitions, not the entire table.
- Maintenance: Old data can be dropped instantly by removing a partition, making retention policies efficient.
- Scalability: Each partition remains a manageable size, avoiding full-table scans and bloated indexes.

### 🧑‍💻 Author
Made with ❤️ by Andre Silva
